Mr.
Speaker, we have known for some time
that the world is in flux. The familiar
signposts are fading, but the contours
of a new global system have yet to take
shape. So, we are in a period of
transition, uncertain, unsettled, and
increasingly
unstable. The recent liberation day
tariff announcements by the US confirms
this stark reality. The era of
rules-based globalization and free trade
is
over. This marks a profound turning
point. We are entering a new phase in
global affairs, one that is more
arbitrary, protectionist, and
dangerous. For nearly 80 years since the
end of World War II, America was the
anchor for the free market economies of
the world. It championed free trade and
open markets and led efforts to build a
multilateral trading
system. This WTO system ushered in
decades of global growth and stability.
It allowed trade to flourish and lifted
millions out of poverty. It benefited
the world and contributed to America's
own economic
strength. And objectively, America
continues to enjoy unrivaled economic
heft. In fact, the US rebounded more
quickly than other advanced economies
from the COVID pandemic. It has surged
ahead of all its major competitors in
the advanced industrial
world. But not all Americans feel this
way about their economy. There are
hollowedout towns in what was once
America's thriving industrial belt.
There are workers whose jobs have
disappeared and whose incomes have
stagnated. They believe that the
American economy is fundamentally
broken.
Discontent was already visible in the
1990s when protesters disrupted the WTO
meeting in Seattle. Frustrations
deepened following the global financial
crisis of 2008 and more recently after
the COVID
pandemic. To be clear, the global
economic system is in need of reform.
Singapore and many others have called
for changes and we have been working
with like-minded countries and partners
at the WTO to reform its
processes. A key concern in America is
China. The sense that the US had given
away too much in allowing China to join
the WTO and that China competes on an
unfair basis, for example, by heavily
subsidizing its own companies, putting
up non-tariff barriers and restricting
market access to US firms.
These concerns should be addressed
within the WTO
framework. In particular, the trade
arrangements and concessions made in the
past when China was only 5% of the
world's
economy should be updated when China now
makes up 15% of the world's GDP.
And if there are disagreements, they
should be resolved through the WTO's
dispute resolution settlement system,
which has been paralyzed and urgently
needs to be restored and
reformed. But what the US is doing now
is not
reform. It is rejecting the very system
it
created. Uh the US has imposed a blanket
10% tariff on imports for nearly all
countries. On top of that, it has
layered on higher tariffs up to 50% for
selected countries, especially those
that run a trade supplies with the
US. According to the administration, the
sweeping tariffs are needed to fix
America's trade
imbalances. But there is nothing
inherently wrong about running a trade
deficit. It simply means that American
consumers are buying more from the world
than the world is buying from America.
Moreover, the focus has been solely on
the goods trade. That only gives a
partial picture. In fact, the US runs a
surplus with many of its trading
partners in
services, exporting software services,
education, entertainment, financial and
business services. But this fact has
been completely
ignored. In Singapore's case, we have an
FDA with America. We impose zero tariffs
on US imports and we actually run a
trade deficit with the US, meaning we
buy more from them than they do from
us. If the tariffs were truly reciprocal
and if they were meant to target only
those with trade surpluses, then the
tariff for Singapore should be
zero. But still, we are being subjected
to the 10% tariff.
We are very disappointed by the US move,
especially considering the deep and
long-standing friendship between our two
countries. These are not actions one
does to a
friend. Asia bears the brunt of the US
tariff increase within the region. China
is the hardest hit, facing a 34% tariff
this round. And this is on top of the
20% tariff increase imposed over the
last two months and the 20% from the
first Trump administration. So taken
together, the average US tariff on
Chinese products now exceeds
60%. In Southeast Asia, the tariff rates
range from 10% to
49%. These measures will accelerate the
fracturing of the global economy.
Instead of flowing based on economic
efficiency, capital and trade will
increasingly be diverted based on
political alignment and strategic
considerations. Several members have
asked about the impact of the tariffs on
specific industries in Singapore. We are
assessing the situation carefully, but
our deeper worry is not the direct
impact that these businesses face. It is
the wider implications for the global
trading system and the world economy. So
let me
explain. First, the reciprocal tariffs
are a fundamental rejection of the WTO
rules. One of the cornerstones of the
WTO multilateral trading system is the
most favored nation principle or
MFN. Most favored nation sounds like
giving special privileges.
actually means the opposite that every
member must treat all other members
equally. In other words, if a country
extends more favorable terms or imposes
additional restrictions to one trading
partner, it must do the same to all
other WTO members. There are some
carveouts and exceptions to the MFN
rule, for example, to allow free trade
agreements. But MFN has long been the
bedrock of the multilateral trading
system. It ensures a level playing
field, prevents discrimination, and
enables countries big or small to
compete fairly in global markets. This
has helped to liberalize trade amongst
more than 100 WTO members, each with
different economic and political and
social
concerns.
America's new tariff regime is a
complete repudiation of the MFN
principle. It opens the door to
selective country bycountry trade
relations based on unilateral
preferences. If other countries adopt
the same approach as the US, the
rules-based trading system will unravel.
This will spell trouble for all nations,
but smaller countries like Singapore
will face greater pressures.
because small countries have limited
bargaining power in one-on-one bilateral
negotiations. So the major powers will
detect the terms and we risk being
marginalized and
sidelined. Second, the likelihood of a
full-blown global trade war is
growing. Singapore has decided not to
impose retaliatory tariffs. Doing so
will only lead to increased cost for
Singaporeans. But other countries may
not be guided by the same considerations
and may have different perceptions and
views. China has already imposed
retaliatory tariffs on US goods. Others
like the European Union are considering
their next
steps. Some think that the new tariffs
are a negotiating tactic. a negotiating
tool by the US to extract concessions in
other
areas. This was what President Richard
Nixon did in 1971. He slapped a 10%
search charge on imports to pressure
Germany and Japan to devalue their
currencies. And when they did, the
tariffs came
off. Indeed, there is a brief window for
countries to negotiate and get some
reprieve from the US before the higher
terroristic effect. And it may be
possible for some rates to be lowered,
but we have to be realistic. Once trade
barriers go up, they tend to stay up.
Rolling them back is much harder, even
after the original rationale no longer
applies. Even if some partial
accommodations are eventually worked
out, the uncertainty generated by such a
drastic move will dampen global
confidence and growth. It will be very
hard to restore the previous status
quo. And in particular, it doesn't look
like the 10% universal rate is open for
negotiation. This seems to be the fixed
minimum tariff regardless of a country's
trade balance or existing trade
arrangements.
Uh furthermore, there are other forces
that could maintain the momentum for
tariffs. In particular, many European
countries are eager to protect their
critical industries like electric
vehicles, green technologies, and
semiconductors from Chinese
competition. They do not want to be a
dumping ground for exports from China or
other countries.
There is also a growing push across the
west to strengthen their domestic
manufacturing capabilities and to reduce
dependence on global supply chains
especially in strategic
industries. So this round of tariff
increases by the US may just be the
beginning of more increases to come
globally. And we've seen this play out
before.
The US enacted sweeping tariff increases
through the Smooth Holly Act in 1930.
Many countries protested and a number
retaliated with their own trade
restrictions and tariffs. This deepened
and extended the Great
Depression. In some ways, today's risk
may be greater. The new US tariffs, if
fully igned, are higher than the ones in
Smooth Holly. Trade is now a much bigger
part of the American and global economy
compared to the
1930s. Supply chains are also more
deeply connected than they were back
then. Any disruption to trade flows will
have wider knock-on effects on the
world. And this brings me to the third
point which is the impact on the global
economy.
Business and consumer confidence has
already been hit by the tariffs.
International trade and investments will
suffer. Our economic agencies got in
touch with several multinational
enterprises and local businesses after
the tariff
announcement. Even those who were not
directly affected by the tariffs are
worried about weakening demand from
their consumers.
Some have put new projects on hold while
they assess the full implications of the
tariffs. These are reactions from
companies based here, but I'm sure the
same conversations are happening in
boardrooms elsewhere.
Over the recent days, we have seen sharp
negative reactions in global stock
markets. It is too early to tell if all
this will spill over into the real
economy, but the downside risks are
clearly rising.
What's troubling is not just the tariffs
themselves, which are already damaging,
but the fact that this new wave of
protectionism is unpredictable and
unstable. Protectionism is already bad,
unstable protectionism is even
worse. Businesses don't know what to
expect. Many are holding back, fearful
that changing rules will leave them with
stranded assets. And all this creates an
environment of deep uncertainty. one
that could tip both the US and global
economy into
recession. The consequences extend far
beyond economics. More and more
countries are turning away from win-win
cooperation and deeper
integration. Instead, we see a rising me
first, win-lose mindset where it's every
country for itself. Some are even
prepared to use aggressive or coercive
means to get what they want at the
expense of others. Meanwhile, global
institutions are getting weaker and
long-standing norms of cooperation are
breaking
down. One major concern is a USChina
relationship. America views China as a
com strategic competitor and threat
which must be dealt with now while
America still has the
advantage. China says it is ready for a
tariff war, a trade war or any other
type of war. The US has now threatened
an extra 50% tariff on China and China
says it will fight to the end.
There are fewer channels for dialogue
which can serve as guard rails to manage
the
relationship. So if the disputes
escalate and destabilize USChina
relationship, the consequences for the
world would be
disastrous. We must be mentally
prepared. The predictable and
rules-based order we once knew is
fading. The new era will be more
volatile with more frequent and
unpredictable shocks. We must be ready
to stand firm and protect our interest
no matter how the external winds may
blow. What does all this mean for
Singapore? In the near term, we expect
weaker global growth, which means
external demand for our goods and
services will
fall. The outward oriented sectors of
our economy will suffer the brunt of the
impact. They include manufacturing espec
especially segments like electronics and
semiconductors, biomedical science which
have higher exo export exposure to the
US, wholesale trade and
transport will be impacted. The global
uncertainty and dampened sentiments will
also impact some services industries
including finance and
insurance. Singapore may or may not go
into recession this year, but I have no
doubt that our growth will be
significantly
impacted. We had originally projected
GDP growth of 1 to 3% for
2025. MTI is reassessing the growth
forecast and will likely revise it
downwards.
Slower growth will mean fewer job
opportunities and smaller wage increases
for workers. And if more companies face
difficulties or relocate their
operations back to the US, there will be
higher retrenchments and job
losses. For now, the measures announced
in this year's budget will provide
support for any short-term
strain. We have a comprehensive package
of measures for households and
individuals. They will receive CDC
vouchers, SG60 vouchers and Usave
rebates to help with their cost of
living. And there are targeted measures
like increase comare assistance for the
more vulnerable
groups. We are also supporting workers
through investments in skills future and
those who find themselves involuntarily
unemployed will receive help to get back
on their feet through the skills future
job seeker support which will start
later this month.
We have also rolled out measures in the
budget to help businesses. There are
short-term support measures through
corporate income tax rebates as well as
schemes to boost their productivity and
competitiveness and to pivot to new
markets. Our economic agencies are also
engaging the firms impacted by the
tariffs to better understand their
responses and see how we can support
them and assist them with any specific
issues they face.
Nevertheless, the situation is fluid and
can change quickly. We will therefore
set up a task force chaired by DPM
Gimyong to help businesses and workers
address the immediate uncertainties,
strengthen their resilience, and better
adapt to the new economic environment.
In addition to our economic agencies,
the task force will include the
Singapore Business Federation, the
Singapore National Employers Federation,
and the
NTU. We will continue to monitor
developments closely. The government
stands ready to do more if and when
necessary. We have the resources to do
so because of the financial discipline
and prudence we've exercised over the
decades.
In this new environment, Singapore must
redouble our efforts to remain a key
node in global flows and a trusted
business hub. We will forge closer links
with like-minded partners who share our
commitment to open and free
trade. The US have may have decided to
turn protectionists, but the rest of the
world does not have to follow the same
path. We will identify other partners to
join us and work around this to ensure
resilience and maintain critical parts
of the multilateral system while laying
the foundations for a possible new and
different global system that can be
achievable later. And this is why I've
made the effort to engage and visit my
counterparts in different countries. I
touched base with the UK Prime Minister
K Starmmer yesterday and have a few more
conversations lined up in the coming
weeks. They are all keen to do more with
Singapore and to expand our economic
cooperation, including in new areas like
the digital and green
economies. In particular, we will
strengthen our collaboration and
integration within ASEAN.
Last Friday, I spoke with Malaysian
Prime Minister Anoir
Ibrahim. Malaysia is also the ASEAN
chair. This year, we agreed to
accelerate ASEAN's integration efforts
to make our region more attractive and
competitive. A special ASEAN economic
minister's meeting will be convened
later this week.
They will discuss further ways that
ASEAN can work together to strengthen
intraan trade and to send a strong
signal of ASEAN's commitment to regional
economic
integration. As a group, ASEAN will also
continue to strengthen our links with
like-minded partners in areas of mutual
interest. Mr. Speaker, we are entering a
changed world. The only way Singapore
can make it through the gathering storm
is to stay united, pull our resources,
our resilience, and our
resolve. The government will do
everything we can to steer Singapore
through the choppy waters and make sure
no one is left behind. We will keep our
economy open, our society cohesive, and
our institutions strong. We will create
new value propositions for businesses
and
investors. We will act boldly and
decisively when needed to ensure
Singapore continues to
succeed. Above all, we will put the
interest of Singapore and Singaporeans
at the center of everything we
do. The road ahead will be harder. The
dangers are real, but so too is our
determination.
In many ways, we are in a better
position than we were 60 years ago when
we became independent.
[Music]